Fashion Recommender Systems

A recommender system in the fashion industry is an automated framework for suggesting which products a user should look at next. Personalized recommendation done well puts the right products in front of the right user at the right time, and can have a serious impact on revenue. ­­Notably G​ilt ​saw double-­digit revenue lifts from their personalization efforts. A given ecommerce site may have 10K to 2.5M products to choose from, and can create unique sets of item suggestions to match individual preferences of millions of users.

...

Collaborative filtering (CF) estimates a user's interest in an item by comparing preferences of many users, or by looking for unstated similarities between items. Depending on who you ask, explicit ​preferences come from actions like purchasing, rating, or favoriting an item. Implicit preferences are picked up from behaviors like searching, browsing, clicking, tracking time spent on various parts of a page, or similar. Some consider a preference explicit only if the user has either rated an item or has been asked specifically about their favorite items or brands.

For CF techniques that utilize matrix factorization techniques on e​xplicit ​preferences, imagine a matrix with users as rows and products as columns, whose entries have 1­ to 5 star ratings that users have given to products. Not every item will have a rating from every user, but perhaps there are patterns in how products are rated en masse. One C​F approach attempts to decompose this matrix into two new matrices, teasing out hidden features that better describe the ratings patterns. With one matrix relating users-­to-­features and another of items-­to-­features, the system can compute an inner product of these two matrices. That yields a new matrix with p​redicted​ user ­item ratings. If it passes a certain threshold (say at least 3.5/5 stars), the product becomes a candidate to show the user. This process assumes that items will accumulate preference data over time, so that the original matrix isn't too sparse to be useful.

In practice, these “unknown features” might mean finding that users who rate Celine handbags 4.5 stars also tend to rate Prada handbags 4.5 stars, and upon inspection you might think of that discovered feature as “minimalist luxury handbags”. The new matrix might predict a high rating for Saint Laurent’s minimalist luxury handbags, even if no single user has expressed a preference for all three brands. Thus, in a sense, the users c​ollaboratively f​ilter​ preferences across the ecommerce site.  

That all sounds well and good, but when is the last time you gave an explicit rating to a fashion product online? While this is typical for platforms like Netflix, a common starting point for much of research on collaborative
filtering,​ there’s not even a place to express this type of preference at tech­-first fashion giants like F​arfetch. And what can you do with users that have no history, or hasn't purchased or favorited anything before? If you ask the media industry, *asking* for explicit preferences in the beginning is a mistake. Whenever you ask a user to fill out interests, you're assuming there exists an opinion, that opinion is strong, that browsing habits match purchase habits, and that their information of the options is perfect enough to produce a true preferences list. They may fill this out with the first brands that come to mind, which may map better to a brand's marketing budget than to the user's closet. Choosing from presets could also mean the user never gets to express what they expect from your site and didn't find on the list. And what happens if those users or brands change over time? 

Even with great information about preferences, fashion items have a fixed or seasonal shelf life and may never replenish if sold out. It is dangerous to get too specific about which exact item matches up between users. An item may be out of season or have sparse sizes available by the time it accumulates enough data to get recommended this way. This is an industry where producing an identical garment can take weeks to months, or perhaps will never exist again because the custom fabric developed for the brand has run out. Defaulting to popular items that float to the top may also be the most alienating to high-spending regulars.

Instead, as noted by Gilt, it's helpful to focus on underlying attributes of an item and generate recommendations based on similarities between brands, prices, product categories, colors, location, age...and bake in an element of randomness. Many recommenders suggest items based on textual descriptions, which doesn’t always scale in a sensible way across a sea of items. Lyst ​points out in one presentation that a women’s “shirt dress” is nothing like a “dress shirt”, but a text-focused recommender might show both to the same user.

What's the next step for recommending items that have never been interacted with before? Visual search. Our next post will be about recent developments in computer vision that are changing the way products can be discovered visually at scale. 

... 
