Fashion + Sensors in retail.

Advances in machine learning research are adding new capabiliites and applications to fashion retail technology. These machine learning tools are updating sensors - from security cameras (CCTV) to radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags - to create richer datasets that automate retail business decisions. [I THINK THE FIRST PARAGRAPH SHOULD BE REWRITTEN SO IT MAKES A STRONGER BUSINESS CASE - THE FASHION INDUSTRY IS GOING THROUGH AN EVOLUTION POWERED BY DATA SCIENCE AND CUTTING EDGE MACHINE LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES. THE PRIMARY NEW TECHNOLOGY IS CALLED DEEP LEARNING, WHICH RECOGNIZES IMAGES AND TRANSFORMS THEM INTO DATA THAT INFORMS DIFFERENT BUSINESS DECISIONS. WHILE BUSINESSES CAN BENEFIT, HOWEVER, THESE NEW TECHNOLOGIES UNEARTH UNPRECENDENTED PRIVACY CONCERNS THAT FASHION RETAILERS SHOULD ANTICIPATE FROM CONSUMERS] 

The same visual analytics satellites use to analyze crowd data can be applied to CCTV feeds to inform retailers how store architecture and displays affect customer traffic patterns.

HERE SAY THERE ARE FOUR PRIMARY APPLICATIONS: DISPLAY, METADATA (??), INVENTORY MANAGEMENT, RECOMMENDER SYSTEMS - LEAD WITH THE BUSINESS APPLICATIONS - AND THEN SPELL OUT HOW THE TECHNOLOGY ENABLES COMPANIES TO ACHEIVE THEM 

One application is to help visual merchandisers create compelling displays of new clothing arrivals. [YOU NEED A TRANSITION SENTENCE HERE -- ISN'T THE TECHNOLOGY VALID FOR SINGLE BRAND STORES AS WELL? THERE NEEDS TO BE A SENTENCE LINKING COMMERCIAL INTERESTS TO THE DATA] In multi-brand stores, placement decisions are determined by advertising and promotion dollars. Placement can be further refined by movement analytics, based on how customers tend to interact with the layout of a specific store. Even before a retail store is constructed, architects and interior architects can test layouts virtually, collecting data on where customers focus their attention during a virtual walkthrough. Companies like IrisVR are working to make this as seamless as possible on the back end.

A second application is to derive “metadata” for specific customers. [THIS IS NOT CLEAR - WHAT METADATA ARE THEY DERIVING? HOW IS THIS USEFUL? ALL I GET FROM THIS IS THAT THE TECHNOLOGY CAN DETECT CLOTHING] In “Real-time clothing recognition in surveillance videos" (2011), Yang & Yu proposed a method to use CCTV videos to detect clothing. [ADD A SENTENCE ABOUT WHAT SEGMENTATION IS HERE - IT'S NOT CLEAR TO THE UNFAMILIAR READER] Their method uses segmentation to parse video images of clothing, a computationally inexpensive method that works with both fixed and moving cameras. The image processing application starts by detecting faces to recognize a human in the footage; it finds the least occluded image, estimates human poses, recognizes dominant pixels as skin tones, detects the foreground, segments clothing and then classifies clothing into eight pre-set categories. EBay Research refined this method in 2014 using clothing detection (identifying objects of interest within a bounding box) instead of segmentation (classifying objects in all the pixels of a given image).

Retail surveillance can also improve inventory management. Increasingly cheap depth sensors (e.g. Kinect) enable CCTV feeds to find humans, estimate their pose (likely based on the locations of joints), and calculate their body measurements. Because clothing is often produced weeks to months in advance of shipping, data about body measurements vastly improves distribution of warehouse sizes across stores, matching sizes to customer body shapes. [IT WOULD BE VERY COMPELLING IF WE HAD SOME DATA ABOUT HOW MARGINS ARE AFFECTED BY IMPROVED INVENTORY MANAGEMENT]. Data about consumers can also be used to improve future sizing and manufacturing for different stores in different locations. Companines like Alvanon, blah, blah are putting this to use. 

This profiling technology also works on static images obtained by smart mirrors, which stores like Rebecca Minkoff in New York use to enable costumers to request items from fitting rooms. It's much easier to process a single-person static image than to process multiple moving images obtained from CCTVs. 

Such metrics shaping individual consumer profiles are familiar to eCommerce; but these deep learning technologies make even richer consumer profiles given that their data sets are built from actual human bodies. Stores can build automated recommender systems encouraging cusomters to try in-stock items immediately. The missing piece is automated inventory management, to ensure the right pieces make it to the right zip codes in the first place. [BUT WHAT ABOUT WHAT YOU SAID EARLIER?] Most stores still manually request new styles and physically count in-stock items. Zara, which uses data extensively (MIT, BOF [WHAT IS THIS?]), found a way to dissociate RFID chips from security tags, providing the retail chain with highly accurate information about inventory in minutes instead of hours (REF). Improved inventory management not only impacts the bottom line: associates can spend more time selling and less time searching for items, delighting customers who don't have to wait long to find the item and size they want. Warhouses can replenish popular styles immediately, alleviating associates' burden to appease customers. [I THINK WE CAN SAY THIS MORE CLEARLY]

ADD A TRANSITION HERE TO TALK ABOUT PRIVACY CONCERNS - SO MUCH FOR BENEFITS, NOW THE RISKS - TO WHAT EXTENT DO THE TECHNOLOGIES ACTUALLY IDENTIFY INDIVDUALS? THE FOOT TRAFFIC STUFF DOESN'T SEEM TO DO SO - IT'S THE DATA AFFILIATED WITH PERSONAL BUYING PROFILES. I ALSO STRUGGLE TO SEE HOW THE CELL PHONE DATA ALIGNS WITH THE EARLIER EXAMPLES. WANT TO MAKE SURE WE ARE ON TRACK. 

Like eCommerce data, however, deep learning technologies capture personally identifyable data that only some companies work to anonymize. There is no precedent to sign a Terms & Agreements clause upon entering a retail store, even if, today, these stores can track a customer's cell phone upon entering a shopping center. Whether or not you’re connected, if a smart phone’s wifi is turned on, its profile of past networks can be easily determined by routers (REF S.Mattu). Even with a scrambled MAC address identifier (REF), how many people do you expect have your home, work, and local cafe’s wifi network stored on their mobile device? While coverage of these types of technologies briefly mention “privacy concerns”, there is little futher prodding into what is meant by privacy in this case; whether those concerns should be felt by stores or consumers; and whether consumers have any reaction once they realize what is happening.

To establish a threshhold for whether retailers should re-think how emerging technologies affect privacy, we use a model developed by Kevin Bankston & Ashkan Soultani in the Yale Law Journal. They claim, “If the cost of the surveillance using the new technique is an order of magnitude (ten times) less than the cost of the surveillance without using the new technique, then the new technique violates a reasonable expectation of privacy”.

How much would it cost to manually track a customer? Let’s take a luxury retail store where associates makes roughly $30,000/year. They often have a client book, along with the ability to use customer profiles to pull up purchase history, especially when a loyalty card program is in place. Assuming the associate spends an average of 5 minutes per customer during their workday, they can track the outfits, behaviors and preferences for 96 customers per day, or $1.20-$1.25 per customer. Even considering commission-based sales of $3000/day on 1% commission only raises that number to $1.50-1.58 per customer.
